Data Cleaning in Machine Learning
What is Data Cleaning?
Data cleaning is the process of identifying and correcting errors, inconsistencies, and inaccuracies in a dataset. It involves handling missing values, removing duplicates, correcting wrong data, and standardizing formats to ensure high-quality input for Machine Learning (ML) models. Clean data improves model accuracy, efficiency, and reliability.

Why is Data Cleaning Important in Machine Learning?
Improves Accuracy: Clean data leads to better predictions and results.

Reduces Bias & Errors: Eliminates inconsistencies that can mislead models.

Enhances Model Performance: High-quality data speeds up training and improves generalization.

Ensures Consistency: Standardized data prevents unexpected behavior in models.

Saves Time & Resources: Clean data reduces debugging and retraining efforts.

Data Cleaning Techniques in Machine Learning 
Handling Missing Values
Removing Duplicates
Handling Outliers
Standardizing Data
Encoding Categorical Data
Note: Please check this tutorial for Pandas Functions for Data Cleaning

1. Handling Missing Values
Handling missing values is essential in data cleaning to ensure data consistency and improve model performance. Here are key approaches:

1. Removing Missing Values
If a dataset contains only a few missing values, removing those rows may be a viable option.
If a column has a large proportion of missing values and is not critical, it can be dropped entirely.
2. Imputation Techniques
Constant Value Imputation: Missing values are replaced with a fixed value such as zero or "Unknown."
Statistical Imputation: Common methods include filling missing values with the mean, median, or mode of the column.
Forward/Backward Fill: Missing values are filled using the previous or next available value in sequential data.
3. Predictive Imputation
Machine learning models can predict missing values based on other available features in the dataset.
4. Marking Missing Data
Instead of filling or removing missing values, a separate indicator variable is created to denote missing entries, helping models recognize patterns in missingness.
5. Interpolation
In numerical and time-series data, missing values are estimated based on surrounding data points using linear or polynomial interpolation.
The choice of technique depends on the nature of the data, the percentage of missing values, and the impact on analysis or model accuracy.

Example Dataset (Before Cleaning)

ID	Age	Salary
1	25	50000
2	30	NULL
3	NULL	60000
4	40	80000
Example (Python - Handling Missing Values)

import pandas as pd

data = {'Age': [25, 30, None, 40], 'Salary': [50000, None, 60000, 80000]}
df = pd.DataFrame(data)
df.fillna(df.mean(), inplace=True)  # Replace missing values with column mean
print(df)
Example Dataset (After Cleaning)

ID	Age	Salary
1	25	50000
2	30	63333
3	31.67	60000
4	40	80000
2. Removing Duplicates in Data Cleaning
Duplicate records in a dataset can lead to misleading insights and inaccurate model predictions. Removing them ensures data integrity and efficiency.

Types of Duplicates
Exact Duplicates – Identical rows repeated in the dataset.
Partial Duplicates – Rows with similar values in some columns but differences in others.
Near Duplicates – Slightly varied entries due to typos, different formats, or inconsistent data entry.
Approaches to Removing Duplicates
Identifying Duplicates – Analyzing the dataset to detect repeated values based on all or specific columns.
Removing Exact Duplicates – Deleting rows that are completely identical.
Handling Partial Duplicates – Keeping one occurrence while deciding which records to retain based on additional criteria (e.g., latest timestamp, highest value, etc.).
Standardizing Data – Cleaning inconsistencies in text formatting, spaces, and case sensitivity before identifying duplicates.
Resolving Near Duplicates – Using fuzzy matching techniques or domain-specific logic to merge or correct similar but not identical records.
Choosing the right method depends on the data structure, business requirements, and the level of acceptable data loss.

3. Handling Outliers in Data Cleaning
Outliers are extreme values that deviate significantly from the rest of the data. They can distort statistical analyses and impact machine learning models.

Identifying Outliers
Visual Methods

Boxplots: Show extreme values as points outside the whiskers.
Scatterplots: Identify anomalies in relationships between variables.
Histograms: Reveal skewness and unusual peaks in distribution.
Statistical Methods

Z-score: Measures how far a data point is from the mean in standard deviations.
Interquartile Range (IQR): Defines outliers as values beyond 1.5 times the IQR.
Handling Outliers
Removing Outliers – If an outlier is due to an error or irrelevant to analysis, it can be removed.
Transforming Data – Logarithmic, square root, or power transformations can reduce the impact of outliers.
Winsorizing – Capping extreme values by replacing them with a predefined threshold (e.g., 5th and 95th percentiles).
Binning – Grouping continuous values into categories to minimize the effect of outliers.
Using Robust Models – Some machine learning models, such as decision trees, are less sensitive to outliers.
The best approach depends on the context, whether outliers represent valuable insights or need to be managed to improve data reliability.

4. Standardizing Data in Data Cleaning
Standardization ensures that data is consistent, comparable, and suitable for analysis or machine learning models. It transforms data into a uniform format, reducing inconsistencies caused by scale differences.

Why Standardization is Important?
Ensures Uniformity – Brings different units or measurement scales to a common format.
Improves Model Performance – Some algorithms (e.g., regression, SVM, k-means) perform better with standardized data.
Enhances Interpretability – Makes it easier to compare and analyze different features.
Methods of Standardization
Z-Score Standardization (Standard Scaling)

Converts data to have a mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 1.
Useful when data follows a normal distribution.
Min-Max Scaling (Normalization)

Rescales data to a fixed range (typically 0 to 1).
Suitable for algorithms that require bounded values like neural networks.
Mean Normalization

Adjusts values relative to their mean, making them centered around zero.
Decimal Scaling

Moves the decimal point based on the highest absolute value to bring data within a standard range.
5. Encoding Categorical Data in Data Cleaning
Categorical data consists of labels or categories that need to be converted into numerical values for machine learning models to process them effectively.

Why Encoding is Important?
Machine learning models work with numerical data, making encoding necessary.
Ensures categorical variables are represented in a meaningful way.
Prevents biases in models due to improper handling of categories.
Types of Encoding Methods
Label Encoding

Assigns a unique numerical value to each category (e.g., "Red" → 0, "Blue" → 1, "Green" → 2).
Suitable for ordinal data where order matters (e.g., "Low", "Medium", "High").
May introduce an unintended relationship between values in non-ordinal data.
One-Hot Encoding

Creates separate binary columns for each category (e.g., "Red" → [1,0,0], "Blue" → [0,1,0]).
Prevents numerical relationships between categories.
Increases dataset size when there are many unique categories.
Ordinal Encoding

Assigns ordered numerical values based on category ranking (e.g., "Poor" → 1, "Average" → 2, "Good" → 3).
Works best for ordinal data where order is meaningful.
Frequency Encoding

Replaces categories with their frequency of occurrence in the dataset.
Useful for handling high-cardinality categorical features.
Target Encoding (Mean Encoding)

Replaces categories with the mean of the target variable for that category.
Commonly used in predictive modeling but may lead to data leakage.